So let's talk about some ways that we can
make state machines without any libraries.
And this is going to be the same for
most mainstream languages.
This is not specific to JavaScript.
The difference between how we usually
manage states and how we should manage
state with state machines is instead
of doing the bottom up approach,
or even an event action approach,
we don't start with the event.
And so that's the big distinction.
We start with what the finite state is and
so on in this case,
when we're modeling this promise state
machine, where we have the idle pending
result in rejected states, we're going
to switch on what the state is first.
So in this case, we have an idle state and
then in this idle state
We switch on the events.
So we determine what event has
happened such as fetch, and
we transition to that
state based on the events.
So they are nested switch statements.
It does look a little bit verbose, but
this is how you could properly structure
a state machine using
these switch statements.
Now one important thing to consider, is
that these states, another way to think of
them is that you could consider them the
behavior of your app or of your machine.
So when you're in the idle state,
for instance,
you have to think about what is the
behavior of my machine in this idle state.
So in this case, we can accept a batch
events which will do something,
it will transition to the pending state,
or we just returned the state.
And this is one of the important points
because consider the other events
that might happen.
We might have a resolve events,
we might have a reject events.
And when one of those events happens,
we want to make sure that we're in
the right states to accept that events.
So when we're in idle and
we didn't really start fetching yet,
accepting a resolved or
rejected events doesn't really make sense.
And in fact, when we're in the pending
states, and when we get a result events,
now we're in the results date, but what if
we received by some weird coincidence or
weird glitch a reject events.
So that sort of doesn't make sense.
And I'm sure you've seen that in some
maps where it says, congratulations or
success or here's your data, and
then immediately it shows an error, and
you're like,
this is sort of an unexpected flow.
I don't really expect that to happen.
And so that's why we separate our
app logic in terms of behavior.
How does it behave when it's in
this state like the pending state.
Or when it's in the idle state, or when
it's in the resolved, or rejected states.
And that way we could prevents what's
called impossible transitions from
happening, which are transitions that
should never ever happen even if you
are 99.9% sure that some event will
never occur in a certain state.
It's always good to model your logic so
that even if that does happen,
it's impossible for
that to affect anything.
So personally, I like using objects
instead to represent a state machine.
And this is something that I thought about
early on when making x date is that I
really don't like writing those
nested switch statements.
And I could see why people do event first
because they only have to write one switch
statement and then use defensive
programming in order to make sure
that those impossible
transitions are covered.
But that's still verbose.
And using a machine, or using an object
actually makes things a lot simpler.
So over here, this is a plain object.
Again, I'm not using any libraries, and
we see that we have a couple
extra properties now.
We have this initial in which I'm just
keeping track of the initial state.
Then we have our nested states.
So we have idle, pending,
resolved and rejected.
In each one of these states,
I have an OnProperty.
And that's where I'm going
to store my transitions.
Each transition is going to be
an object where the key is the events.
And the value is the next
state that's going to happen.
So when we're on the idle state,
and that fetch event happens,
now we're on the pending state.
And so you can see that over here we
have a transition function where we
first grab the states.
And we're using this ES6 syntax in
order to say if it doesn't exist,
just return undefined.
And then we dive into the on object,
grab that transition from the events and
then we returned the states.
So let's take a look at I'm
gonna go into our scratchpad,
which if you can remember
is 00/index.html.
And we're just going to make an example
over here just to play around with it.
So I'm gonna go ahead and
I'm going to copy this machine over here.
Just gonna.
There we go.
So we have our machine as an object.
And so what we also want is we
want to transition functions.
So let's say const transition.
And I'll move this up here equals and
I'm using the ES6 arrow fat arrow
syntax for defining these functions.
So we have our current state and
we have in events and
we want to look up first, this dates.
So we're gonna look that
up on the state's property.
So we're going to return
the machine.states and
give it that state if that exists, and
then we're going to look
up the transitions, so on.
And then we give it the events.
And that's gonna hopefully
return our next states.
But in case the machine does not
accept this event in the current
state that it's in,
we just want to return the states.
And so, let's see what this looks like,
let's say that we transition and
we're going to output this.
So we're going to output
transition from let's say
we're in the idler state and
a FETCHER can happens.
See what that looks like.
All right, so we have the NPM start first.
Perhaps it should be already running.
Let's see.
JS, yep, we're in here.
Okay, well let's console.login.
So let's start outputting it console.log
transition I will FETCH all right.
So you will see that we're
in the pending states.
And so now let's try if we're
in the pending state, and
the FETCH event happens,
which this obviously shouldn't happen,
we shouldn't be trying to FETCH while
we're still in the pending state.
And so you could see that we're
still in the pending state.
So we assume that nothing
really happened there.
Now let's assume that we're in the pending
state and we get to resolve events.
So what should happen
is we get the result,
the results string,
which is exactly what we want.
And also, if we do reject,
we could get the rejected string as well.
All right.
So, in order to actually use this,
doing this pure functions is fine,
but we need some sort of way of
keeping track of the current state.
And obviously,
that's a little bit side effect,
ie we can't really use pure functions.
And in fact, any application that you
work on is not going to be 100% pure,
because after all,
you need to output things on the screen or
you need to do some sort of side effect or
something.
And so that's where we get into
interpreting state machines.
So let's just make a very
simple interpreter.
And what interpreter is,
is it takes a state machine and it says,
I'm gonna keep track
of your current state.
So whenever you send an events to me,
I'm just going to internally
update the current state just so
that we could track it.
So let's create a simple
interpreter over here.
I'm going to say send,
we're gonna have a send function and
that function is going
to take an event and so
this is gonna be one of those fire and
forget side effects functions.
And let's also keep track
of the current state.
So the current state should be
the machine that initial state first.
And if you remember,
this is going to be the idle states.
So when we send an event,
the first thing we want to do is we want
to determine what the next state is.
So const next state.
And we do that using our transition
function that we created,
so transition (currentState, event) and
lets log that and then we will return it.
So return, sorry we wont return it,
we will set currentState to the nextState.
Okay, so what this is going to do is
whenever we send in an event, it's going
to mutate this currentState so that we
keep track of what the currentState is,
and then it's going to log out
that nextState, so let's try that.
All right, so we actually have to send.
So let's go ahead and put this on window.
All right, so now, when we send,
let's say FETCH, we get pending, great.
So now when we send RESOLVE,
we get resolved.
So you see it's internally keeping
track and we're outputting
the nextState based on the currentState
in the events that was just sent.
And so that's how you can make a really
simple interpreter using just a few
lines of code.
In fact,
even this console log is unnecessary.